---
title: Tools of trade
layout: post
---

This will probably end up as a periodic post about dev tools I'm using for a
day to day job.


## First, the OS

For the last 5 years or probably more I am an ArchLinux distro user. Before
that I was a distro hooper switching on a regular basis. I was never satisfied
and was always looking for something better, something that won't get in my way
to often. And I finally found that in ArchLinux. It is a lean rolling-release
distro built by professionals for professionals. It has a fantastic package
manager and build system. If the package is not in the binary repositories you
will certainly find it in [ArchLinux User Repository](), a repo hosting a build
recepies (called [PKGBUILD]()) maintained by the community.

If there is no package available (a rare occasion) it's easy to build new
package from source, git/merurial/svn repository or alien packages (deb, rpm).

Although it is a common opinion that Arch is not for inexperienced users, which
is probably true due to its manual installation process and "Do it Yourself"
style, I had generally far less problems using it than using other mainstream
distributions. Arch Wiki is one of the best docs I've used and the community is
knowledgeable and helpful.

Currently I'm running Arch on several laptops and desktops as well as few
arm-based little servers/media players around the house.


# The editor

After OS this is IMHO the most important tool for a developer. You spend a
great deal of your time in it so you must now your way around very well. 

I use vim (neovim lately). The reason for this is probably my sysadmin
background. Some 15 years ago I worked as a system administrator doing mostly
linux servers and some network gear administration. vi is usually available by
default on most distribution. Learning curve is steep. You have to invest a
great deal of time in training yourself but, once you are in, the sky is the
limit.

The stuff that gives newcomers a log of headache is modal way of work and
adhering to the "keep your hand on the home row" principle. It take some time
but it's worth it. At one point you don't think about keystrokes, it just
happens as you think.

The other editor I fancy the most is emacs but I never get a hang on it,
although I do admire its architecture and extensibility.

Don't get fooled by the guys that says that tools doesn't matter, it is the
stuff you will create that matters. They are right on that part, at the end of
the day it is what you create what matter the most. But, tools do matter. You
must be efficient using your tools. Choose right tools and learn them well. If
you spend too much time navigating around code base, manually refactoring and
reformatting or typing boilerplate code it's wasted time you could spent doing
something better, right?

Always try to automate repetitive and boring stuff. Your job should be fun.


# Other stuff
